CDT Testimony - Med Privacy (6/14/96) Statement of Janlori Goldman Deputy Director Center for Democracy and Technology Before the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight Subcommittee on Government Management, Information and Technology on Medical Records Confidentiality June 14, 1996 Overview The Need and Demand for Federal Privacy Protection Consensus Exists Misuse of Personal Health Information Consequences of Not Protecting Personal Health Information Principles for a Health Privacy Policy Conclusion Footnotes Chairman Horn and Members of the Subcommittee: I. Overview My name is Janlori Goldman and I am the Deputy Director of the Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT). CDT is a non-profit, public interest organization dedicated to preserving free speech, privacy and other democratic values on the Internet and other interactive communications media. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on behalf of CDT in support of the need for strong, comprehensive federal legislation to protect the confidentiality of medical records. One of CDT's primary goals is the passage of federal legislation that establishes strong, enforceable privacy protection for personally identifiable health information. We believe that comprehensive legislation that protects the privacy of health information is critical. The public will not have trust and confidence in the emerging health information infrastructure if their sensitive health data is vulnerable to abuse and misuse. We commend the efforts of Chairman Horn and Representative Gary A. Condit for their leadership towards enacting legislation to protect the privacy of health information. Presently, there is no comprehensive federal law that protects peoples' health records. However, a Louis Harris survey found that most people in this country mistakenly believe their personal health information is currently protected by law. And most people mistakenly believe they have a right to access their own medical information. In fact, only 28 states allow patients access to their own medical records and only 34 states have confidentiality laws. Federal privacy policy is urgently needed to address the increasing demands for health information by those outside the traditional doctor-patient relationship. Information demands of insurance companies, managed health care companies, researchers, employers and law enforcement are eroding the doctor-patient confidentiality that is central to health care. CDT believes Congress must act to protect the privacy of personally identifiable health information so that our laws will finally conform, to some extent, with the American public's perception and expectation that their sensitive medical records are confidential. Technological innovations that allow medical records, data and images to be transferred easily over great distances, impacts our country in significant ways. The development of a national information infrastructure and information superhighway are changing the ways that we deal with each other. Traditional barriers of distance, time and location are disappearing as information and transactions become computerized -- few relationships in the health care field will remain unaffected by these changes. In the absence of any Congressional action, the collection and use of personally identifiable health information will continue to occur within electronic, networked environments without privacy protections. But while this information revolution may hold great promise for enhancing our nation's health, CDT and others believe that personal health information, in both paper and electronic form, must be protected by strong, enforceable privacy rules. Even useful technologies pose potential risks to privacy, where an individual's need to keep information confidential is forced to take a back seat in the drive to lower costs, increase efficiency and facilitate health research through automation. Last Congress, this Subcommittee held hearings on the Fair Health Information Practices Act, sponsored by Representative Condit, and co-sponsored by Chairman Horn, Representative Craig Thomas, and others. The bill, H.R. 435, was approved by the full Government Operations Committee as part of its ongoing consideration of health care reform.1 Testifying in support of H.R. 435 last Congress were industry representatives, privacy and consumer advocates and health policy specialists, including: Rep. Nydia Velazquez (D-NY); Nan Hunter, Department of Health and Human Services; Dr. Alan Westin, Columbia University; John Baker, Equifax, Inc.; Dr. Donald Lewers, American Medical Association; Fredric Entin, American Hospital Association; Joel E. Gimpel, Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, representing the Workgroup on Electronic Data Interchange; Kathleen Frawley, American Health Information Management Association; Dr. Richard Barker, IBM Corporation; Dr. Martin Sepulveda, IBM Corporation; Robert S. Bolan, Medic Alert Foundation International; and Professor Paul Schwartz, University of Arkansas Law School. In January, 1995, Representative Condit reintroduced H.R. 435. Representative Jim McDermott (D-WA) recently introduced H.R. 3482, also aimed at protecting personal health information. Our testimony today outlines the need and demand for federal privacy protection, and key principles that should be embodied in any comprehensive legislation protecting health privacy. II. The Need and Demand for Federal Privacy Protection A. Consensus Exists A consensus exists that federal legislation is needed to protect the privacy of personal health care records. In 1993, a conference in Washington, D.C. was co-sponsored by the U.S. Office of Consumer Affairs, the American Health Information Management Association, and Equifax. Panelists from the American Medical Association, CIGNA Health Care, the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility and IBM urged policymakers to address the issue of health information privacy. At the conference, Louis Harris and Associations released their Health Information Privacy Survey, prepared with the assistance of Dr. Alan Westin, a privacy expert at Columbia University. The survey found that the majority of the public (56%) favored the enactment of strong comprehensive federal legislation governing the privacy of health care information. In fact, eighty-five percent (85%) said that protecting the confidentiality of medical records was absolutely essential or very important to them. Most people wanted penalties imposed for unauthorized disclosure of medical records (96%), guaranteed access to their own health records (96%) and rules regulating third-party access. Buttressing these findings, another 1992 Harris survey revealed that nearly ninety percent (90%) of the public believed computers make it easier for someone to improperly obtain confidential personal information. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the public believed they had been a victim of an improper disclosure of personal medical information. A number of studies have determined that a federal law is needed to protect peoples' medical records. Georgetown University Law Professor Larry Gostin concluded that a federal preemptive statute based on fair information practices was necessary to protect personal privacy as networked health information databases continued to grow.2 In 1994, the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) issued a report entitled Protecting Privacy in Computerized Medical Information, which addressed the consequences of computerizing medical records on individual privacy. In recommending comprehensive federal legislation, OTA found that: [t]he expanded use of medical records for non-treatment purposes exacerbates the shortcomings of existing legal schemes to protect privacy in patient information. The law must address the increase in the flow of data outward from the medical care relationship by both addressing the questions of appropriate access to data and providing redress to those who have been wronged by privacy violations. Lack of such guidelines, and failure to make them enforceable, could affect the quality and integrity 