WORKSPACE changes from 3.4 to 3.5 WORKSPACE changes from 3.4 to 3.5 Summary The most important new feature in 3.5 is the ability to easily offline program applications using Workspace geometry point paths. The applications include spot welding, arc welding, paint spraying, material handling, sealant, laser cutting, water jet and deburring. Once the geometry path has been created and saved with the model the user can issue a Follow GP path command to automatically create and simulate the robot programme in whatever robot language is currently selected. Tool graphics have been designed to simulate each tool action. Many new robot languages are now available as options for Workspace including: ABB Rapid, Yaskawa/Motoman Inform1 and Inform2, Sankyo and IBM AML2, PSI. The commands for editing GP paths have been improved, as have the commands for editing geometry points, editing several geometry points at once (multiple GPs), and editing teachpoints. The commands for editing several geometry points should save the user some time over the old GP edit methods. Many of the new commands for editing teachpoints are useful in reverse engineering and re-engineering workcells, and for last minute touch-ups of robot programs during offline programming. The user-interface and the efficiency of the robot and tool calibration have been improved, while the Robotrak setup procedures have been altered to increase their reliability even when used by inexperienced users. In general, the changes in 3.5 reflect the past few years' accumulated experience from both within RSL and close contact with industrial customers of simulating and offline programming complex workcells using Workspace and Robotrak These features now give the customer an affordable, user friendly tool to carry out the most complex of tasks at shop floor level with confidence. New and changed commands MODEL MENU 1. Load object into model: when a model has been selected the objects displayed will be only those with no parents. 2. Set project directory : now sets the Ready for robot directory to projectdir/ROBOT. 3. Make directory : copies a file to a path (which is relative to the WS3 directory). CREATE MENU Create GPs submenu 1. The Create Gps on polyline submenu now has the additional command Between two polylines which creates GPs along the current polyline in the direction of the nearest point on the other polyline. This is useful if the GPs are being defined on part whose geometry is represented by two parallel polylines. 2. Create Gps over entire polyline and Create Gps over entire surface boundary: the commands on these menus work in a similar way to the Create GPs on polyline and the Create Gps over surface boundary except that by default the first GP is at the beginnings of the polyline and the second GP is at the end of the polyline. 3. Align axes with tangent: when this flag is on then when GPs are created along a polyline or a surface boundary their default position has the normal vector normal to the tangent (as was the case in Workspace 3.4), whereas when the flag is off the normal vector of the GPs is not normal to the tangent. 4.Create exact GP path on polyline: this is the Exact GP path command renamed. LAYOUT MENU Edit object submenu 1. Information: colour, view, and non-joint axes added. Edit robot submenu 1. Approach vector: moved from Options menu - now saved with the robot model. Used to decide orientation when creating GPs relative to an object feature. Edit tools submenu 1. Attach tool: moves the current object so that its base frame coincides with the coordinate frame of the end link of the robot. A base frame may be defined for an object using the Add tool base frame command. 2. Load and attach tool: same as attach tool except that it also loads the tool object from a model file. Loads an object and then positions the object so that its base frame coincides with the coordinate frame of the end link of the robot. A base frame may be defined for an object using the Add tool base frame command. The user can create models containing tools as a library for this command. To create a library of tools simply create a model containing all the tools and then save the model. 3. Dispose of tool: allows the user to select and delete one of the objects (and its descendants) attached to the end link of the robot. 4. Add tool base frame: adds a coordinate frame to the current object. This may be edited using the Move axes and Turn axes commands (on the Edit joint menu). The frame is used when automatically positioning a tool on the end of the robot (see Attach tool). 5. Gripper of interest: specify which of several grippers on a robot is being referred to. when setting gripper parameters on this menu. 6. Time to open gripper: sets the time taken to open or close the gripper of interest during a simulation. 6. Spot weld gun of interest: specify which of several spot weld guns on a robot is being referred to when setting gun parameters on this menu. 7. Spot weld duration: set the duration of a spot weld (when the gun is closed) by the gun of interest during a simulation. 8. Gun closed to semi-open time: set the time taken for the spot weld gun of interest to go from closed to semi-open during a simulation. 9. Gun semi-open to open time: set the time taken for the spot weld gun of interest to go from semi-open to full open during a simulation. Edit current pointer/Edit geometry point/Edit teachpoint submenus 1. Move/Turn CP/TP/GP: Several commands have been renamed so that phrase approach vector is used instead of z-axis:- Move along approach vector, Approach vector up, Approach vector down, Reverse approach vector, Approach vector away from base, Drag approach vector. Edit geometry point submenu Some options have been moved onto the Edit multiple GP submenu. Edit multiple geometry points submenu Almost all the commands on this menu operate on a group of GPs selected using the multiple object selection side bar. 1. Create Tps from Gps submenu (contains Create TPs from multiple GPs, Create Tps from all GPs). 2. Change Gps approach vector: changes the approach vector for the selected GPs. Options are Arla to TP (converts GPs created in the ARLA language assuming an x-axis approach vector into GPs suitable for use in the TP language where a z-axis approach vector is assumed) and TP to Arla These options may be used with other languages which have similar approach vectors to TP and Arla. 3. Remove tool from GPs: removes the current tool frame from the GPs. This is useful if the GPs were created from teachpoints using an active tool frame but the user wishes to view the GPs as though they were representing the position of the faceplate of the robot at each teachpoint. (see also Add tool to GPs). 4. Add tool to Gps: removes the current tool frame from the GPs. This is useful if the GPs were created from teachpoints using a nil tool frame so that they represent the position of the faceplate of the robot, but the user wishes to view the GPs as though they were representing the position of the end of the robot tool at each teachpoint. (see also Remove tool from GPs). 5. Turn GPs about own x-axis: turn all the GPs about their own x-axis. 6. Turn GPs about own y-axis: turn all the GPs about their own y-axis. 7. Turn GPs about own z-axis: turn all the GPs about their own z-axis. 8. Autoturn GPs about approach vector:attempts to find a suitable angle to turn all the GPs about their approach vector such that all the GPs become achievable by the current robot, then performs the turn. Edit teachpoint submenu Some options have been moved onto the Edit all teachpoints submenu. 1. Autoturn TP about approach vector: allows the user to interactively turn the teachpoint about its approach vector, showing as it is turned the position of the robot with its tool moved to the teachpoint. Edit all teachpoints submenu 1. Create Gps from all TPs: creates a geometry point for each teachpoint. If the user wishes then the GPs may also store the teachpoint configuration, or if auxiliary axes are present the GPs may store the auxiliary axes positions. 2. Reflect all TPs using joints: reflects all the teachpoints by adjus