A Global Network to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons
  
ABOLITION 2000

A Global Network to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons

The Abolition 2000 Network is a network of over 300 organisations and
growing on every continent working for the abolition of nuclear weapons.
It grew from many seeds - the World Court Project, the International
Coalition for Non-Proliferation, the Global Alliance against Nuclear Arms=
,
the Abolition Caucus, etc. All of these movements are like streams that l=
ed
into the river that is the Abolition 2000 network. It is not a membership
body but is open to all organisations endorsing the ABOLITION STATEMENT,
drafted at the NPT Conference in New York in 1995. Its over-arching
premise is the vision of entering the 21st century with a plan in place f=
or
the elimination of nuclear weapons.

What is the Network?
300 organisations have organised themselves into what was termed a
"tight" (rather than the usual loose) network which aims to provide group=
s
concerned with nuclear issues a forum for the exchange of information
and the development of joint initiatives. The "tightness" of the network
(like the tautness of a web) is defined by how close the members of the
network work together and how good the lines of communication are.

The Network plans to have an office in California, USA, staffed by a
facilitator. The Global Network Office will be overseen by a Management
Group. The substantive work of the network is done by International
Working Groups on issues relating to the abolition of nuclear weapons.

How did it come about?
In 1995 at the Conference to Review and Extend the Non-Proliferation
Treaty in New York a group of 40 to 50 activists, representing NGOs from
all around the world met each day to coordinate their work and called
themselves "The Abolition Caucus". This group drafted a consensus
document which was known as the "Abolition Statement". In less than two
weeks the first 200 organisations had signed the statement and this
number is still growing. Added to this, the International Coalition for
Non-Proliferation organised a meeting during the NPT Conference on a
Draft Nuclear Weapons Convention, called "Beyond the NPT". The
demand for a Convention became the prime focus of the lobbying work of
the Abolition Caucus and also of the Abolition Statement. They called on
the delegates to

initiate immediately and conclude by the year
2000 negotiations on a nuclear weapons abolition
convention that requires the phased elimination
of all nuclear weapons within a timebound
framework, with provisions for effective
verification and enforcement.

The Abolition Caucus requested the NPT parties to adopt this goal in the
final report of the Conference. The opposition to the indefinite,
unconditional  extension of the NPT was clearly expressed in the original
statement, which has since been updated to remove references to the
Conference and other dates.

Development of the Network
A core group went on to organise a further meeting in The Hague to
coincide with the oral hearings at the International Court of Justice in
November 1995 of the advisory opinion on the use and threat of use of
nuclear weapons (World Court Project). The 60 participants at this
meeting agreed by consensus to found a network and defined its
structure. The title "Abolition 2000 - A Global Network to Eliminate
Nuclear Weapons" was chosen.

The idea of a "tight network", consisting of regions, working groups and =
a
distribution/communications centre (later titled the "Global Network
Office") was born. Most importantly it was decided that there should be
no central committee to take decisions on behalf of the network, and that
initially no common strategy would be decided, except to take action
under the only agreed common position: the Abolition Statement, which
everybody had signed. The group that had organised the meeting in The
Hague was given the task of setting up the office and finding the funding
for a staff person for it. A second meeting in Edinburgh in March 1996
gave this group the title "Interim Management Group", whose function is
solely to oversee the functioning of the Global Network Office. The
members of the Interim Management Group are:  Lysiane Alizard
(France), Colin Archer (Switzerland), Janet Bloomfield (UK), Reiner Braun
(Germany) Jackie Cabasso (USA), Michael Christ (USA), Xanthe Hall =20
(Germany), Pamela Meidell (USA), Alice Slater (USA), and Alyn Ware, =20
(Aotearoa/NZ).  It was agreed that this group should be more regionally =20
balanced than it presently is, and it is hoped that new members will be =20
found before the next full meeting of the Network in the Pacific Region i=
n =20
1997.

The Regions
The Regions are at present North America, Central and South America,
Europe, the Pacific, Asia, Africa and the Middle East. The Network has
some organisations in all of these regions, but the strongest are the Pac=
ific,
Europe and North America. Asia has much activity, but little participatio=
n
in the meetings at present. Some regions are establishing regional
networks to look for common strategies. The USA, Canada, Germany and
Norway have formally established abolition networks.
To join these networks contact:
AOTEAROA/NZ - Kate Dewes,  P O Box 8390, Christchurch,
Aotearoa/New Zealand, Tel/Fax: +64-3-348 1353, E-mail:
katie@chch.planet.co.nz
CANADA - Debbie Grisdale, Physicians for Global Survival, 170a Booth
St., Ottawa, Ontario, K1R 7W1, Canada, Tel: +1-613-233 1982, Fax: 233
9028, E-Mail: pgs@web.apc.org
GERMANY - Xanthe Hall, IPPNW Germany, Koertestrasse 10, D-10967
Berlin, Germany, Tel: +49-30-693 0244, Fax: 693 8166, E-Mail:
ippnw@oln.comlink.apc.org
NORWAY - Frederik Heffermehl: Norwegian Peace Alliance,  N Juelsgt
28A, N-0272 Oslo 2, Norway, Tel: +47-2244 8003, Fax: 2244 7616
USA - Karina Wood, Peace Action, 1819 H Street NW, Suite 420,
Washington DC 20006-3603, USA, Tel: +1-202-862 9740, Fax: 862 9762, E-
Mail: panukes@igc.apc.org

The Working Groups
The Working Groups deal with substantive issues arising out of the
Abolition Statement. They concentrate on furthering the 11 points
included in the statement and recommend further strategies to the
Network. The members of each working group are fluid, but the convenor
remains the same. Some groups meet regularly and others communicate
by e-mail, fax, telephone and post. Anyone interested can participate at
any one time by contacting the convenor.

Nuclear Weapons Convention: convened by Juergen Scheffran (INESAP)
Institut fuer Kernphysik, Schlo=DFgartenstra=DFe 9, D-64289 Darmstadt, Ge=
rmany, Tel: +49-
6151-163016, fax: 166039, E-mail: scheffran@hrzpub.th-darmstadt.de
The time is right to demand a Nuclear Weapons Convention (NWC). As in
the Abolition Statement, negotiations should start now because it will be=
 a
long process to complete them, and NGOs should be involved in this.
Working for a NWC is the logical next step of the World Court Project, as
it is for the International Network of Engineers and Scientists and the
Pugwash, who have set up a Study Group on the NWC. At the group's
meeting in New York in March 1996, an outline of the elements of a model
treaty was discussed with various participants taking on the drafting of
specific language. An executive summary of the treaty is now complete
and has been forwarded to the Canberra Commission (a Commission of
experts convened by the Australian Government to discuss concrete
measures to achieve the abolition of nuclear weapons). Plans are being
made to organise a World Conference to Abolish Nuclear Weapons in
1998.

Overcoming Nuclear Threats: convened by Rob Green (WCP UK)
2 Chiswick House, High Street, Twyford, Berks RG10 8AG, UK, Tel/Fax: +44-=
734 340 258,
E-mail: robwcpuk@gn.apc.org
The group is assessing and will report on the implications of the
International Court of Justice's advisory opinion(s). It will propose act=
ions
for the nuclear weapons states to comply with the ruling. It aims to
coordinate the work to challenge the doctrine of deterrence. The
dete