Criminal Law: Felonies & White Collar Crime Leading Illinois Criminal Law: Felonies & White Collar Crime Attorneys Criminal Law: Felonies & White Collar Crime Criminal Law: Felonies & White Collar Crime Criminal Codes Attempt, Conspiracy, Aiding and Abetting Offenses Felonies Crimes Causing Harm to Persons Homicide and Suicide Assault and Battery Rape Kidnapping Intimidation Stalking Hate Crime Federal Drug and Gun Laws Crimes Causing Harm to Property White Collar Crimes Bribery Computer Crime Embezzlement False Statements Fraud Obstruction of Justice Perjury Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act Securities Fraud and Insider Trading Tax Crimes Defenses and Punishment Crime Victims' Rights Resources Criminal Law: Felonies & White Collar Crime This chapter outlines how the criminal justice system operates and describes the most serious criminal violations--felonies and white collar crime. It also includes information about the rights of persons accused of crimes and the rights of crime victims. Domestic abuse and protective orders are covered in the Family Law Chapter. Criminal procedure is covered in the Process of a Case: Civil & Criminal Chapter. Private causes of action that result from criminal conduct are covered in the Personal Injury Law Chapters. Finally, misdemeanors, the juvenile justice system, and driving-under-the-influence violations are covered in the Criminal Law: DUI & Misdemeanors Chapter. Criminal Codes Criminal law defines conduct that is prohibited by the government and the range of penalties that can be imposed for violating these prohibitions. Persons who violate criminal laws incur penalties ranging from fines to imprisonment or, in some states, execution. All crimes are defined by statutes. These statutes are collected and organized into books of rules known as criminal codes. In addition to the Illinois state criminal code, which applies only in Illinois, the federal government has a criminal code that regulates certain crimes nationwide. Most criminal activity violates either a state law or a federal law, not both; however, an important exception is drug crimes, which can be prosecuted in either state or federal court or both. Every crime is defined by a list of elements. In a criminal trial, the prosecutor attempts to prove all the elements of the crime the person is accused of committing. If the judge or the jury decides all the elements of the crime have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt, the accused person is guilty of the crime. If the prosecutor cannot prove all the elements, the accused cannot be found guilty of the crime. Attempt, Conspiracy, Aiding and Abetting Anyone who, with intent to commit a crime, takes a substantial step toward committing the crime may be guilty of attempt to commit a crime. Merely thinking about committing a crime is not a crime; even preparation for a crime is not a substantial step. For example, if someone buys a gun with intent to kill another person, the act of buying is mere preparation. However, going to a person's house after buying a gun with intent to kill the person may be a substantial step that is enough to charge a person with attempting to commit a crime. The law of conspiracy and the law of aiding and abetting are other general doctrines that apply to a wide range of offenses. A conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to commit a crime. For example, if three people conspire to commit murder, at least one of them takes action to further the conspiracy, and the murder actually occurs, they all can be charged with both conspiracy and murder. Even if a conspirator backs out of the conspiracy, but the other conspirators commit the crime, all conspirators may be criminally liable if the acts were reasonably foreseeable. A person who intentionally aids or advises another in committing a crime may be guilty of aiding and abetting, and may be criminally liable for the acts of the other person, as well. Thus, if someone intentionally advises another how to commit robbery and lends the robber a car to use in the getaway, both people are equally liable under the law. Offenses Criminal codes penalize a variety of activities. Generally, an offense is any violation of the Illinois Criminal Code. The Criminal Code makes a major distinction between felonies and misdemeanors. A felony is a crime for which a person can be sentenced to one year or more in the penitentiary, or to death. Misdemeanors are crimes for which a person can be sentenced to less than one year in the penitentiary. Felonies The most violent crimes, such as murder and rape, as well as so-called white collar crimes, generally are felonies under the Illinois Criminal Code. Crimes Causing Harm to Persons Homicide and Suicide Homicide is the unlawful killing of another human being. There are several types of homicide: murder, manslaughter, and reckless homicide. All forms of homicide are felonies. Murder is the unlawful killing of another with intent to kill. Murder is divided into subcategories by degree of seriousness. First degree murder is killing someone with intent to kill or to cause great bodily harm, or knowing that one's actions will cause death or create a strong probability of death or great bodily harm. First degree murder also includes unlawful killing during the commission of a forcible felony. Second degree murder is similar to first degree murder, except at the time of the killing the offender has the unreasonable belief that the killing is justified, or the offender is acting under an intense and sudden passion resulting from being provoked. Manslaughter and reckless homicide differ from murder because these crimes do not require proof of intent. Under Illinois law, involuntary manslaughter is unintentionally killing another person while engaged in an action that is likely to cause death or great bodily harm, if the action is done recklessly. However, if the cause of death is by a person recklessly driving a motor vehicle, the crime is called reckless homicide. Suicide is taking one's own life. Suicide and attempted suicide no longer are crimes in Illinois. However, it is a crime to induce another to commit suicide. Assault and Battery Under Illinois law, assault and battery are separate crimes. Assault is defined as an act that makes another person have reasonable apprehension of battery. Battery means intentionally or knowingly and without legal justification causing bodily harm to another person, or making an insulting or provoking physical contact with a person. Aggravated assault is an assault with a mask or a weapon, or an assault against a person the offender knows is a government employee, a person with a disability, a police officer, or a senior citizen. Aggravated battery is a battery committed under the same particular circumstances as aggravated assault. Other laws make battery of particular people, such as family members, criminal acts. These laws include domestic battery, battery or aggravated battery of an unborn child, aggravated battery of a child or institutionalized mentally retarded person, and aggravated battery of a senior citizen. A separate statute makes transmission of HIV a crime if the person knows he or she is infected with HIV and contaminates another person through sexual contact, donation of blood or other body fluids, or sells or shares drug paraphernalia. Rape Criminal sexual assault--also known as rape--is a felony that carries with it severe penalties. Criminal sexual assault is sexual penetration by force or threat of force, without consent of the victim, or against a minor. Aggravated criminal sexual assault is criminal sexual assault when one of the following occurs: A dangerous weapon was used or displayed The offender caused bodily harm The rape occurred during the course of another felony The victim was over 60 years of age The victim had a physical disability The victim was under nine years of age The victim was institutionalized and severely mentally retarded It is criminal sexual abuse, sometimes called statutory rape, for any one to have sexual penetration or sexual conduct with a victim under the age of 17. Criminal sexual abuse also can be sexual conduct other than sexual penetration in which force is used or the victim was unable to consent. Kidnapping Kidnapping is secretly and knowingly confining a person against his or her will, or using deceit, enticement, force, or threat of force to cause a person to go from one place to another with the intention of secretly and knowingly confining that person against his or her will. Confining a child 12 years old or younger without the consent of the child's parent also constitutes kidnapping. Aggravated kidnapping is kidnapping under additional circumstances or with additional actions, such as kidnapping while wearing a mask or with a dangerous weapon, or kidnapping for ransom. All forms of kidnapping are felonies. Intimidation The crime of intimidation is defined as intending to cause another person to act a certain way by threatening the person by phone, by mail, or in person. The threats can include threatening to Hurt the person, another person, or property Physically confine or restrain the person Commit a crime or accuse the other person of committing a crime Expose the person to hatred or ridicule Cause a strike or boycott In Illinois, intimidation is a felony. Stalking Stalking also is a felony. Stalking is the crime of knowingly following a person or putting the person under surveillance without justification, combined with threatening the person or causing the person to believe the stalker will harm him or her physically. The acts of following or watching must occur on at least two separate occasions to be stalking. A person commits aggravated stalking by actually causing physical harm. Another form of aggravated stalking is stalking that violates an order of protection. Orders of protection are described in detail in the Family Law Chapter. Hate Crime Illinois law prohibits hate crime, which is defined as a crime such as assault, battery, or theft committed against a person because of his or her ancestry, color, disability, gender, national origin, race, or sexual orientation. For example, a group of white youths who chased and beat two black youths, referring to them using racial insults, were guilty of a hate crime in Illinois. Federal Drug and Gun Laws Federal laws contain harsh penalties for distributing controlled substances, especially if firearms are even remotely involved. For example, any person who possesses, with intent to distribute, five grams of crack cocaine is subject to a mandatory sentence of five years without parole. If a gun is available for use or is being carried during a drug transaction--even if it is not used--a mandatory five-year sentence must be imposed consecutively to a conviction for the drug offense. Thus, the person with five grams of crack cocaine with intent to distribute would receive a mandatory ten-year sentence without parole if he or she was carrying a gun. In most circumstances, federal judges cannot depart from these mandatory sentences. Penalties for controlled substance offenses become even harsher as quantities of the contraband increase. Crimes Causing Harm to Property Depending on the value of the property involved, as well as the level of violence, most property crimes are felonies in Illinois. The legal definition of theft is obtaining, exerting control over, and intending to deprive; or knowingly using, concealing, or abandoning so as to deprive a person of his or her property. This definition is much broader than what most people think of as theft. It can include writing bad checks, keeping found property without making a reasonable attempt to find its rightful owner, misusing trade secrets, unlawfully tapping into cable television or other television services, interfering with public utilities, or taking large sums of money by deception from persons over age 60. Unless the value of the property taken is $300 or less, the crime of theft is a felony. Additionally, theft always is a felony if a firearm is involved or if the accused has been convicted previously of theft, burglary, or robbery. Burglary, because it involves entering or remaining in a building or dwelling without authority and with the intent to commit theft or a felony there, generally is a felony. Not only is it burglary to enter a house unlawfully with the intent to steal money or property, but it also is burglary to enter with the intent to commit a felony such as arson or murder. Similarly, robbery almost always is felonious. Robbery is unlawfully taking personal property from another person or in the presence of the other person while using or threatening to use force against the person. Aggravated robbery is robbery committed with a dangerous weapon. White Collar Crimes Although there is no fixed definition of white collar crime, a number of nonviolent crimes frequently are grouped together as white collar crimes. The term "white collar crime" generally is used to describe crimes that have cheating or dishonesty as their common basis. These crimes typically are committed by professionals or entrepreneurs under cover of legitimate business activity. Such crimes may be difficult to prosecute because of their complexity. Often they carry lesser penalties because they are not associated with violence. However, defendants convicted of white collar crimes may incur enormous fines, be ordered to pay restitution, or spend time in jail. Today, there is a trend toward stricter punishment for white collar crimes, as people recognize the financial damage white collar criminals inflict on society. As a practical matter, it is impossible to describe every activity that fits within the definition of white collar crime, because white collar crime takes many forms. Some criminal actions are prohibited by specific laws narrowly drawn to outlaw a particular activity. Other actions are not covered by specific laws but instead are prosecuted under one or more "catch-all" laws criminalizing dishonest behavior generally. Bribery Federal law and Illinois law both prohibit bribery. The purpose of most bribery statutes is to prevent people from seeking preferential treatment from public officials and to prevent public officers from using their offices for personal gain. Specifically, if a government official is offered or seeks anything of value for himself or herself in exchange for performing an official act, a fraudulous action, or any action in violation of his or her official duty, the elements of bribery may be met. Computer Crime Computer crime is an area of the law in which the government appears to be playing catch-up with the growth in new technologies. Some variations of computer crime are so new that there are no specific laws to address them, and general laws in existence do not seem adequate in proscribing the particular illicit activities. Generally, the conduct specifically outlawed by federal statute includes: Knowingly accessing a computer, without authorization or exceeding authorization, and thereby obtaining confidential national security information Intentionally accessing a computer, without authorization or exceeding authorization, and thereby obtaining the financial information of a financial institution or of a credit card issuer Intentionally accessing, without authorization, a computer of a federal department or agency used exclusively by that department or agency or affecting the government's use thereof Knowingly, and with intent to defraud, accessing a federal interest computer, without authorization or exceeding authorization, to further a fraud or obtain anything of value Intentionally accessing a federal interest computer, without authorization, to alter, damage, or destroy information and thereby causing a loss of $1,000 or, if medical information is affected, any amount Knowingly, and with intent to defraud, trafficking in any password or similar information through which a computer is accessed, without authorization, if such computer affects interstate or foreign commerce or is used by or for the government Illinois law also recognizes the crimes of computer tampering, aggravated computer tampering, and computer fraud. Computer tampering occurs when a person knowingl