Elder Law Leading Illinois Elder Law Attorneys Elder Law Elder Law Age Discrimination in Employment Illinois Human Rights Act Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 Relationship Between IHRA and ADEA Health Care Decisions and Protective Arrangements Living Will Power of Attorney for Health Care Guardianship Commitment to a State Institution Voluntary Commitment Emergency Hold Judicial Commitment Social Security Retirement and Survivors Insurance Railroad Retirement System Disability Benefits RSDHI Disability Insurance Supplemental Security Income Medicare Medicare Parts A and B Costs Not Covered by Medicare Insurance Issues Related to Medicare Resources Elder Law Elder law is one of the fastest-growing specialty areas of legal practice today. As recently as ten years ago, almost no one would have described their legal practice as an elder law practice, because most lawyers assumed that the concerns of elderly clients were indistinguishable from the interests of any other group. Because few lawyers focused their practices on senior citizens, many seniors felt their unique concerns were ignored by the legal profession. All this is changing rapidly. As the average age of Americans rises, society is becoming increasingly aware of the unique problems facing elderly people, as well as the professional opportunities available in serving them. Governments have responded with a wide array of state and federal programs designed to guarantee financial and physical well-being for the elderly and to fight age-based discrimination. As senior citizens take a more active role in asserting their rights, an increasing number of the elderly have sought legal representation from lawyers sensitive to their needs. Elder law is not a well-defined area of legal specialization. Elder law borrows from many other areas such as health, probate, estate planning and trusts, civil rights, and even consumer protection. Each of these areas is discussed fully in separate chapters of this Guide. Age Discrimination in Employment With longer life expectancies and better access to health care, more people are staying active longer and want to remain in the work force past traditional retirement age. Also, many elderly people need the income from employment. Consequently, employers have far more elderly employees, and the number of elderly job applicants is higher than at any other time in history. Unfortunately, incidents of age-based job discrimination are also on the rise. Seniors in Illinois have two basic means--one state, one federal--with which to counter age discrimination in the workplace: the Illinois Human Rights Act and the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. Illinois Human Rights Act The Illinois Human Rights Act (IHRA) is a comprehensive anti-discrimination law prohibiting labor organizations, employers and employment agencies from discriminating based on age (over the age of 40), ancestry, arrest record, citizenship, color, disability, marital status, national origin, race, religion, sex, or unfavorable military discharge. Under IHRA, it is illegal in most instances for an employer to use a person's age as a basis for decisions regarding hiring, recruitment, pay, promotion, transfer, discharge, discipline or privileges if the person is over the age of 40. For example, an employer cannot replace an older worker with a younger worker simply because the employer wants a young work force. Involuntary retirement before the age of 70 generally is prohibited. IHRA does permit an employer to offer various insurance plans or other fringe benefits to an employee based on age as long as the cost to the employer is reasonably equivalent for all employees. Any person who feels victimized by a violation of IHRA may bring a civil action directly against the employer or may file a charge with the Illinois Department of Human Rights. If a person files a charge of discrimination with the Department of Human Rights, he or she must do so within 180 days of the discriminatory act. For example, if an older person is fired and believes the motive was age discrimination, the charge must be filed within 180 days of the employer's notice of termination. Any individual who files an employment discrimination lawsuit must show That the employee is a member of the protected class (in this case, the protected age group) That he or she is qualified to do the job That he or she was rejected for the job or was fired from the job despite being qualified That the employer filled the job with someone with similar qualifications The limitation period for filing a lawsuit directly against the employer is two years from the date of the discriminatory act. Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 The federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA) also prohibits age-based discrimination by labor organizations, employers, and employment agencies. Under ADEA, employers are prohibited from using age as a basis for making hiring, firing, promotion, or compensation decisions, or from limiting, segregating, or classifying employees in any way that would deprive or tend to deprive an individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status. ADEA specifically prohibits the use of job advertisements that specify an applicant should be "young," a "recent graduate," or that use terms such as "retired" or "over 65." ADEA has five major exceptions to its coverage. Employers accused of violating ADEA usually invoke one or more of these exceptions as a defense for their actions: Tenured Faculty Members: Until recently, ADEA did not prohibit compulsory retirement at age 70 for tenured faculty members at institutions of higher learning. This exception expired on December 31, 1993, so compulsory retirement ages for tenured faculty are no longer permissible. Executives and Policy Makers: A small number of high-level employees with substantial executive authority are not covered by ADEA and can be subjected to compulsory retirement at age 70. This exception is a very narrow one and does not allow for compulsory retirement policies for mid-level managers. Good Cause: An employer is permitted to discharge an employee for "good cause," a catch-all category that includes many different forms of failure to do a job adequately. Occupational Requirement: In certain narrowly defined situations, an action otherwise impermissible under ADEA may be legal if the employer's action is "reasonably necessary to the operation of the business" or is based on "reasonable factors other than age." For example, employers may have mandatory retirement policies for firefighters and airplane pilots. Bona Fide Seniority Systems and Employee Benefit Plans: Generally, it is permissible for an employer to adopt a bona fide seniority system or employee benefit plan as long as the system or plan is not intended to evade the purposes of ADEA. A victim of age-based discrimination can bring an action under ADEA against his or her employer within two years of a non-willful violation or within three years of a willful violation. Relationship Between IHRA and ADEA The relationship between IHRA and ADEA is complex, primarily because ADEA was not intended to supersede or replace existing state regulations regarding age-based discrimination. Both laws cover age discrimination in employment. An aggrieved person may file a charge with the Illinois Department of Human Rights for relief under IHRA, or may file a charge with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) based on discrimination in employment under the ADEA. However, there are rules concerning the relationship between the state and federal systems. Because of the complex interplay between the two laws and because they have different statutes of limitation, a lawyer or representative of the EEOC or Illinois Department of Human Rights can advise a victim of age discrimination how, when, and where to proceed against an employer. Health Care Decisions and Protective Arrangements With people living longer than ever before and medical technology advancing at a rapid pace, more people are beginning to plan now for their future health care. Illinois law provides for different arrangements in which people set forth in advance what will happen should they become incapacitated and unable to make health care decisions. These arrangements are designed to protect individuals who, in varying degrees, are unable to care for themselves. Because much of the law in this area is new and is evolving rapidly, it can appear confusing, even contradictory, at times. This is one area of law for which it is especially important to hire good legal counsel who can be relied upon to stay abreast of important new laws and recommend appropriate changes. Living wills and powers of attorney for health are two written documents covering decisions in this area. If people do not create these documents, their health care decisions may be covered by the Illinois Health Care Surrogate Act. Under this act, a surrogate or a guardian--usually a family member--may be appointed to make important decisions about a person's health care if he or she becomes unable to do so. When a patient becomes unable to make a decision about life-sustaining treatment, and is diagnosed with a condition that will require such a decision, the health care provider must inquire about the existence of a living will or power or attorney for health care. If neither of these documents exists, the physician is authorized to rely upon a surrogate to make the decision. The patient must be informed that a surrogate has been appointed and who the surrogate is. Any decision made by the surrogate decision maker should be made in accordance with the patient's wishes. Living Will Despite its popular name, a living will is not actually a will at all. A living will is a document spelling out how much and what kind of medical care its writer (declarant) wants if he or she becomes terminally ill and incapable of communicating his or her wishes. "Terminally ill" means the person has an incurable or irreversible condition and the use of medical procedures only delays and prolongs the dying process. Living wills are controversial and, although many states refuse to recognize them, they are recognized in Illinois. Any competent adult can make a living will. Although many people have living wills drafted by their lawyers at the same time they have traditional wills drafted, living wills do not need to be drafted by lawyers. Illinois has a suggested living will form, which people can use if they wish. Many people seek advice from a doctor before drafting a living will so they can describe their wishes specifically, taking into account the kinds of medical technology currently available to them. Also, it is useful for a person who signs a living will to inform his or her doctor of what the living will says. The most important point about a living will is that the individual decides how much and what kind of health care he or she wants. Declaration This declaration is made this ________ day of ________ (month, year). I, ________________ , being of sound mind, willfully and voluntarily make known my desires that my moment of death shall not be artificially postponed. If at any time I should have an incurable and irreversible injury, disease, or illness judged to be a terminal condition by my attending physician who has personally examined me and has determined that my death is imminent except for death delaying procedures, I direct that such procedures which would only prolong the dying process be withheld or withdrawn, and that I be permitted to die naturally with only the administration of medication, sustenance, or the performance of any medical procedure deemed necessary by my attending physician to provide me with comfort care. In the absence of my ability to give directions regarding the use of such death delaying procedures, it is my intention that this declaration shall be honored by my family and physician as the final expression of my legal right to refuse medical or surgical treatment and accept the consequences from such refusal. Signed ________________________ City, County and State of Residence ________________________ The declarant is personally known to me and I believe him or her to be of sound mind. I saw the declarant sign the declaration in my presence (or the declarant acknowledged in my presence that he or she had signed the declaration) and I signed the declaration as a witness in the presence of the declarant. I did not sign the declarant's signature above for or at the direction of the declarant. At the date of this instrument, I am not entitled to any portion of the estate of the declarant according to the laws of intestate succession or, to the best of my knowledge and belief, under any will of declarant or other instrument taking effect at declarant's death, or directly financially responsible for declarant's medical care. Witness ________________________ Power of Attorney for Health Care Living wills can be used only for terminal illnesses. Treatment decisions for non-terminal illness can be addressed by the creation of a power of attorney for health care. A power of attorney for health care is a document that one person (principal) signs in order to give another person (agent) authority to make health care decisions if the principal becomes incapacitated. Unlike a living will, a person's health condition does not have to be terminal for a power of attorney for health care to be effective. The power of attorney for health care sets out exactly what the agent will do if the principal becomes unable to make health care decisions. It may state that the agent has complete authority to make health care decisions based on what the agent believes is best, or it may state specifically what the health care decisions should be. For example, the principal may declare that every measure should be used to keep him or her alive, or that medical treatment should be stopped under certain circumstances. A principal must be at least 18 years old in order to create a power of attorney for health care. Illinois has a suggested short form power of attorney for health care, or a principal may write his or her own power of attorney for health care as long as it contains certain information required by law. The power of attorney for health care must name the agent, describe the power the agent will have, and be signed by the principal and dated while the principal still is able to make his or her own decisions. Guardianship The Illinois Guardians for Disabled Adults Act provides that a court may appoint a guardian, if a person (ward) becomes mentally or physically incapable of making personal or financial decisions. The guardian may be appointed as a guardian of the person or guardian of the person's estate, or both. The purpose of guardianship is to promote the well-being of disabled adults, and to prevent abuse, neglect, and exploitation. To create a guardianship, any person can petition the court, whether that person is a potential guardian, a potential ward, or a third person. Usually a petition is made by a family member or close friend concerned about the person's competence to manage property or make personal decisions. A petition must include the name and other information about the person, the value of the person's property, and the name and other information about the proposed guardian. It also must set forth the reasons why guardianship is needed. The petitioner has the burden of proving the ward's incapacity and the court applies a standard of the best interest of the ward in making its decision. A ward can be restored to capacity by petition to the court. Anyone can bring a petition and must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the ward no longer is incapacitated and is able to make provisions for personal care or management of his or her property. For many families, guardianship causes a drastic change in the family relationship, especially if not all family members agree that a petition for guardianship should be filed. Some of this potential stress can be avoided if an aging person creates a living will or power of attorney for health care while still legally competent. Another option is to create a living trust, which is discussed in the Estate Planning, Wills & Trusts Law Chapter of this Guide. Commitment to a State Institution There are three ways an individual in Illinois can be committed to an institution for mentally ill persons. Commitment sometimes becomes an issue for elderly people. Voluntary Commitment A person 18 years of age or older in Illinois may request voluntary admission to a mental health facility. This voluntary admission may be done very informally without application. The facility director will deem the individual suitable to be admitted after an examination. Voluntary admission also may be requested formally by filing an application with the facility director. Any person admitted voluntarily to a mental health facility must be informed of his or her right to be discharged. Persons admitted informally may be discharged at any time during normal day-shift hours starting from the first day after admission. People who are admitted by way of the formal voluntary admission procedure must apply for discharge in writing, and will be discharged within five days of the request. Emergency Hold Any adult may petition the director of a mental health facility to admit someone on an emergency basis. The hospitalization must be necessary to protect the admitted person from hurting himself or herself or others. The petition must be accompanied by a certificate from a physician or a clinical psychologist, and it must state the reasons why the person should be admitted involuntarily. The person held under an emergency admission has the right to a medical examination within 24 hours and a right to a hearing within five days. Judicial Commitment Any adult may petition a court for judicial admission of another individual to a mental health facility. The person petitioning for involuntary judicial admission must file the petition in the county where the person sought to be admitted resides. The petition must state the facts that make commitment necessary and the names and addresses of witnesses to these facts. Upon the filing of a petition for commitment, the court will set the matter for hearing or, if the petition does not contain physicians' certificates, will order an examination. The proposed patient receives notice of the hearing and a written summary of his or her rights. No involuntary admission may be made unless the court finds that the person is unable to care for himself or herself, or that the person is a danger to himself or herself or others. A judge may involuntarily commit someone to a state institution for an initial period of up to 180 days. After that period, the patient is entitled to periodic review of his or her case and possible release. Social Security Congress passed the Social Security Act in 1935 to create a very broad social safety net for all United States workers and their families. The Social Security Act and its amendments started several public benefit programs. Most of these programs are financed by taxes levied on workers. Employers automatically deduct a portion of each worker's paycheck and match that amount with money from their business or organization. Self-employed workers are responsible for paying the entire amount themselves. The three largest programs within the Social Security Act are Retirement, Survivors, and Disability Health Insurance (RSDHI); Supplemental Security Income (SSI); and Medicaid. RSDHI is the name of the federal government's benefits program for workers and retirees, and therefore is of special interest to seniors. RSDHI itself contains three separate programs to cover retirement, disability, and health insurance (Medicare). These three programs are extremely complex. Although detailed descriptions are beyond the space limitations of this book, a general familiarity with them is helpful for understanding one's entitlements. Retirement and Survivors Insurance Despite the fact that Retirement and Survivors Insurance (RSI) is only one branch of RSDHI, which in turn is only one branch of the Social Security Act, when most people refer to Social Security they actually mean RSI. Payments from RSI are the Social Security checks that millions of Americans receive each month. Social Security was not intended to be a person's sole source of income, but to supplement other income sources such as pensions, insurance, savings, and investments. However, for many, RSI is their only source of income. A worker gains RSI coverage by performing covered employment for a certain amount of time. The term "covered employment" means most types of work including full- or part-time wage or salaried work, self-employment, farm work, membership in the United States Armed Services, employment in private nonprofit organizations, most domestic work, and most federal, state, and local government employment. The only major exceptions are railroad employees separately covered by the Railroad Retirement System, federal workers hired before 1984, and certain religious workers. The rules of eligibility and benefit amount are quite complex and provide limited coverage for spouses, children, and survivors. Generally, a person begins receiving RSI benefits at age 65; however, a worker has the option of initiating benefits at age 62. All benefits are based on what is called the primary insurance amount (PIA): the amount a worker is entitled to if he or she retires exactly at age 65. The amount of the monthly check varies depending on how much the worker made each year. The higher his or her pay, the higher the benefits, up to a maximum dollar amount. A person who initiates benefits at age 62 receives a reduced monthly amount equal to a percentage of his or her PIA. This is a permanent reduction that amounts to approximately seven percent of the PIA for each year a person receives benefits before age 65. Postponing the receipt of benefits until after age 65 can entitle a worker to receive higher monthly amounts. Cost-of-living increases are built into the system so that the monthly amount automatically increases each year as the national cost of living rises. Family members receive benefits based on the worker's retirement benefits. The spouse of an eligible worker draws spousal benefits on the worker's account--usually one-half of the worker's PIA--if the spouse is at least 62 years old or cares for a child eligible for child's benefits on the worker's account. Other bases for family eligibility are Spousal benefits for a divorced spouse if he or she was married to the insured worker for at least ten continuous years and has not remarried Full benefits for a surviving widow or widower of a fully insured worker from age 65 A one-time death benefit (currently $255) for surviving relatives of fully insured workers who apply within two years of the worker's death Benefits for the child or grandchild of an insured worker if he or she was dependent on the worker when benefits began, is unmarried, and Is 18 years old or younger Is 19 years old or younger but enrolled as a full-time elementary or secondary school student, or Is older than 18 years but became disabled before reaching age 22 As a general rule, an eligible individual must apply for RSI benefits in order to receive them. It is wise to apply at least two months before the desired start of payments, because completing paperwork takes some time. Failure to apply for benefits as soon as one is entitled to them can forfeit earned benefits. Anyone interested in learning how much he or she is likely to receive in RSI benefits can visit a local Social Security office and request an estimate of future benefits based on one's earnings. Railroad Retirement System The Railroad Retirement System is a federal income insurance program specifically for workers in the railroad industry. Originally, this system was independent of the Social Security Administration, but in 1974 its provisions were integrated into the Social Security System. The integration was not entirely smooth, however, which has led to complex and confusing rules that are often the source of errors in awarding benefits. Most of the rules for Railroad Retirement closely parallel those for RSI. A retired railroad w