Personal Injury Law: General Leading Illinois Personal Injury Law: General Attorneys Personal Injury Law: General Personal Injury Law: General General Concepts of Tort Law Degree of Fault Needed to Recover Negligence Intentional Misconduct Strict Liability Comparative Fault Vicarious Liability Burden of Proof Defenses Damages Suing the Government Areas of Personal Injury Practice Product Liability Strict Product Liability Negligent Design or Manufacture Breach of Warranty General Accidents and Injuries Assault and Battery Illegal Confinement Landowner Liability Workers' Compensation Resources Personal Injury Law: General Personal injuries, as their name implies, are injuries to an individual person. Crimes are wrongful acts against society. The government punishes those who commit crimes with criminal penalties. For personal injuries, the government does not punish the wrongdoer but gives the victim the right to pursue a private, civil lawsuit, called a tort action, against the wrongdoer. Some wrongful acts are both crimes and torts, and can subject the wrongdoer to both criminal penalties and tort remedies. This chapter outlines the actions that lead to most personal injury lawsuits, including general accidents and injuries, use of defective products, and injuries occurring to workers on the job. The Personal Injury Law: Transportation Chapter deals with actions that result from transportation-related accidents. The Personal Injury Law: Medical & Professional Malpractice Chapter discusses medical and legal negligence. General Concepts of Tort Law Tort laws are based on the premise that when someone does something to harm another person physically, mentally, or financially, the person harmed ought to be compensated for the loss. Tort lawsuits are governed by a set of rules that are different from the rules that govern criminal lawsuits. Degree of Fault Needed to Recover There are three kinds of torts -- negligence, intentional misconduct, and strict liability. Each requires the plaintiff to show a different degree of fault to recover from the defendant. Negligence A person is negligent if he or she fails to act as a reasonable person would act in a similar situation. Examples of negligence include inattentive driving that causes an automobile accident, or a store owner failing to repair a defective escalator that causes a fall. If a reasonable person would have driven attentively, or if a reasonable store owner would have fixed the unsafe escalator, the person who drove inattentively or failed to make repairs could be found negligent by a judge or jury. Negligent behavior is almost never criminal. Intentional Misconduct Intentional misconduct occurs when someone, acting deliberately, does something that hurts another person or damages that person's property. The law does not require that the person intend to cause the injury he or she actually inflicts, only that he or she acted deliberately or with complete indifference toward a person's own safety or the safety of others. For example, a driver of an automobile may intend only to scare a pedestrian by swerving toward the pedestrian, but if the driver hits the pedestrian, the driver commits intentional misconduct. Intentional misconduct can be more difficult to prove than negligence, but often a plaintiff can recover greater damages if he or she can show the defendant acted intentionally. Intentional misconduct is often criminal behavior also. Examples of intentional misconduct include assault and battery. Strict Liability In some situations, a plaintiff can recover for injuries received even if the defendant uses utmost care. In these situations, a defendant is said to be strictly, or absolutely, liable for any damages resulting from his or her actions. The principle behind strict liability is that some activities are necessary but so dangerous that even a reasonable person cannot make them completely safe. As a social policy, defendants are permitted to engage in certain activities but are held strictly liable for any injury resulting from the activity. Strict liability claims most commonly result from extremely dangerous activities such as blasting, excavating, or demolishing a building or from defective products. Comparative Fault Tort law attempts to compensate victims if their injuries are caused by another person. When one person clearly causes all of another person's injury, blame is easy to place. In many other cases, however, the victim's actions help cause the injury or make it worse than it would otherwise be. For instance, a negligent driver might injure a pedestrian who is negligently walking in the street, instead of on a sidewalk where a prudent pedestrian normally walks. A person injured by a defective chain saw may have suffered more severe injuries by negligently failing to wear safety goggles while using the chain saw. In these cases, a judge or jury must calculate how much each party is at fault. Each state has its own rules for calculating damages that can be recovered when a victim is at least partially to blame for his or her own injury. Illinois has a comparative fault rule. Under the comparative fault rule, a judge reduces the amount of any damage award by the percent that the victim's own actions contributed to his or her injuries. For example, if a jury finds that a plaintiff suffered $100,000 in damages, but was 30 percent at fault, the judge reduces the damage award by 30 percent to $70,000. The reduction may be made only up to 50 percent. If the victim is more than 50 percent at fault, he or she collects nothing. Vicarious Liability There are several ways a person can be held liable for the actions of another person. This is known as vicarious liability. For example, a parent might be held responsible for damage caused by his or her child if the parent knows that the child is likely to injure someone, the parent has the ability to control the child, and the parent negligently fails to exercise any control over the child. The owner of a vehicle can be held responsible for accidents caused when another person drives the vehicle if the owner negligently entrusts the vehicle to the other driver. The most common form of vicarious liability is called respondeat superior Under respondeat superior, an employer is responsible for torts committed by employees within the scope of their employment. A business owner is not usually responsible for acts committed by independent contractors. For example, if a pedestrian is struck and injured by a person driving to a party, the victim has a claim against the driver. If the pedestrian is hit by a person driving a delivery van for his or her employer, then respondeat superior gives the pedestrian claims against both the driver and the employer. As a practical matter, personal injury plaintiffs often focus their recovery efforts on the employers because employers usually have more money or better insurance. Burden of Proof The burden of proof in a civil lawsuit is less strict than the proof required in a criminal case. In a criminal case, the state must prove a person's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The state is required to meet this high standard because a defendant's liberty, and possibly even life, are at stake. The plaintiff in a personal injury lawsuit need only show that it is more probable than not that an injury was caused by the defendant's actions. If the jury finds that the evidence even slightly favors the injured party, then it must find for the plaintiff. The personal injury plaintiff need only meet this lower standard because the defendant's life and liberty are not at stake. Defenses Sometimes people are allowed, or privileged, to commit acts that otherwise constitute assault or battery, and not be liable for damages. If one acts in defense of self, others, or one's land, the use of force can be justified. Illinois has a "Good Samaritan" law that states that a civilian has no duty to provide aid to an injured person; however, once a person voluntarily assists someone, he or she becomes liable for any injury that results from the failure to exercise due care. Law enforcement officials and firefighters have a