Federal, State & Local Government Law Leading Illinois Federal, State & Local Government Law Attorneys Federal, State & Local Government Law Federal, State & Local Government Law Public Financing Federal Financing State Financing Local Financing Government Contracts and Technical Assistance Lobbying Dealing with Administrative Agencies The Limited Role of Administrative Agencies The Administrative Process The Role of Courts Freedom of Information Act Resources Federal, State & Local Government Law Some businesses deal exclusively with one or more branches of government, while others only have to deal with the government to get permission to embark on certain projects. This chapter focuses on areas in which businesses frequently come into contact with federal, state, and local governments, such as public financing, government contracts, lobbying, and dealing with administrative agencies. The Environmental & Natural Resources Law Chapter examines issues relating to business interaction with agencies protecting the environment. The Intellectual Property & Computer Law Chapter discusses how a business registers a trademark with federal and state authorities. The Commercial Real Estate Law Chapter covers zoning and land use variances. Appendix A lists government sources of financing and management assistance. Public Financing One of the government's primary interests is to expand the economy and increase opportunities for a wider cross-section of the population to participate in the economy. In a poor economy, businesses lay off employees, and people without jobs tend to vote against incumbent politicians. Therefore, politicians have created a variety of government programs that aim to promote the interests of businesses. One of the most important means by which the government seeks to help businesses is by making available various forms of public financing so that businesses can expand and grow. Public financing is available from state, local and federal sources. Federal Financing The federal government offers a number of assistance programs primarily through an organization called the Small Business Administration (SBA). Created by Congress in 1953 to help small businesses, the SBA provides financial, procurement, advocacy and management assistance. Every year, the SBA guarantees bank loans totaling over three billion dollars for small businesses. Small businesses that qualify for SBA loans usually can receive far more favorable terms than they would otherwise be able to get. Most SBA loans are for a lengthy period of time and qualify for a relatively low interest rate. Despite their advantages, SBA loans are not right for all businesses: the SBA loan process usually takes longer than the conventional loan process, the SBA can require more personal guarantees and collateral, and the SBA sometimes restricts a business' ability to get additional financing as a pre-condition to the SBA loan. State Financing In Illinois there are various public sources of financing under the direction of the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs (DCCA). As the state's lead economic development agency, DCCA is committed to helping the state maintain the best possible climate in which to own or operate a business. Its First-Stop Business Information Center is designed to help answer questions about starting or expanding a business. Other sources of financing from the state include the Certified Lender Program; Small Business Development Loan Program; Illinois Expert Finance Partnership; Surety Bond Guaranty Program; Business Development Public Infrastructure Program; Enterprise Zone Program; Business Expansion; Detention and Location Assistance; Illinois Small Business Development Center Network; and the Minority, Union, and Disability Business Loan Program. Each of these programs has its own standards for determining who qualifies for economic assistance and how much money is available for which ventures. Information on all of them is available from the DCCA. Local Financing Many local government units provide assistance in various forms to new businesses. Some offer technical assistance or financial services, while others offer tax credits or loan packaging assistance. A program assisting local government with financing is the Community Development Assistance Program while the Community Development Support Unit provides technical assistance to local governments. A businessperson interested in programs offered in a given area should contact the business services or planning unit of the county or city in which the business is or will be located. Government Contracts and Technical Assistance Of all the corporations in the United States, the single largest is the federal government. Likewise, of all the corporations in Illinois, one of the largest is the state government. Despite these figures, government entities are frequently overlooked by business managers as a source of business opportunities. There are a number of ways a business can secure government contracts at the federal, state, and local levels. On the federal level, each individual federal agency receives requests for bids from small businesses. To receive copies of various federal agencies' requests for bids, a business files an application with each federal agency that the business wants to do business with. Many of these federal agencies have special programs specifically designed to assist small and minority-owned businesses because regulations require that a certain percentage of all government contracts be reserved for small or minority-owned businesses. The SBA provides assistance to small businesses in this regard by publishing a list called the Small Business Subcontracting Directory. The directory lists the major contractors to the federal government and which are most likely to be in need of subcontracting. One of the missions the SBA takes most seriously is its goal of management assistance. To this end, the SBA offers a number of different programs that businesses can turn to for advice in such areas as marketing, buying, financial management and administration. Among these programs is the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), which puts small businesses in touch with retired executive volunteers who offer counseling and advice. The SBA's Office of Procurement Assistance helps businesses get information and develop strategies concerning selling to the federal government. The SBA also lobbies Congress and other federal organizations on behalf of small businesses. There are several other government agencies that a small business should be aware of. For example, the various branches of the armed services offer assistance to businesses in securing defense-related contracts. The U.S. Army maintains an office known as the Defense Logistics Agency to assist small businesses with contracts. Also, the General Services Administration (GSA) helps businesses that want to sell their products directly to the government by providing information on which government agencies wish to purchase products. Lobbying Lobbying is the business of persuading politicians to pass laws that are favorable to a particular person or agency and to defeat potential laws that are unfavorable to lobbyists or their clients. Despite the negative image that some lobbyists have, lobbying government on behalf of business is a long respected tradition in this country. Not only have lobbyists been around for many years, but many government agencies and departments rely on lobbyists to provide them with information necessary to make decisions and set policy. The government is not the large faceless machine it sometimes appears to be. There are people behind every decision and every regulation, and many of these people are sincerely concerned about staying abreast of changes in the law and industry and in promoting the economic vitality of the area they oversee. There are laws governing lobbying at both the state and federal level, including requirements for lobbyists to identify the clients on whose behalf they lobby. Lobbyists who lobby the United States Congress are governed by federal lobbyist registration 