Real Estate Law Leading Illinois Real Estate Law Attorneys Real Estate Law Real Estate Law Encumbrance Easement Deed Restriction Lien Assessment Real Estate Ownership Joint Tenancy Tenants in Common Advantages and Disadvantages of Co-Ownership Residential Real Estate Title Deeds Recording Buying or Selling a Home Real Estate Agents Seller Disclosures Home Warranties Foreclosure Landlord -- Tenant Leases Security Deposits Repairs Call an Inspector Withhold Rent Criminal or Civil Action Eviction Tenant's Rights Privacy Access Sublease Utilities Utility Suspension Cold Weather Utility Rule Discrimination in Housing Resources Real Estate Law Real estate law involves rights in the ownership and possession of land and buildings attached to land. Real estate law often is referred to as the law of real property to distinguish it from the law of personal property, which includes all other property. A stumbling block for many consumers entering the real estate market is the number of unfamiliar terms frequently used by real estate professionals. Because real estate is one of the oldest areas of the law, it uses many old terms and concepts, but many rights and responsibilities regarding real estate have evolved and been updated as society has changed. This chapter summarizes some of the real estate concepts and terms one involved in real estate is likely to encounter, the process one goes through to buy or sell a house, and the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants. Encumbrance An encumbrance is a legal interest in property held by someone other than the owner of the property. An encumbrance is not an ownership interest in real property, but it creates some kind of obligation for the owner. An encumbrance attaches to the property, not the property owner, so the property may be bought and sold even though there is an encumbrance attached. Easement An easement is the right to use another person's land for a particular purpose. There are many forms of easements. Public utility companies frequently have utility easements that permit them to run gas, water, or electrical lines through the property of others. The owner of property near a lake might buy from the owner of lake shore property an easement to cross his or her property to access the lake. A person who owns property that is land-locked may receive an easement from an adjacent land owner to have access in and out of the property. This is called a right of way. Deed Restriction Deed restrictions may also be known as covenants, conditions, or restrictions. Deed restrictions, which usually are included in the seller's deed to the buyer, generally are imposed to maintain certain standards. Restrictions may limit the color one may paint a house, the kind of trees one may plant, or the size of home one may build on the property. Lien A lien is a charge against property that provides security for a debt or obligation of the property owner. The lien holder does not own the property. Some liens are voluntary, such as when the owner of property takes out a mortgage. Other liens may be imposed. For example, a lien may be imposed on property for nonpayment of taxes. One of the most common liens is the mechanics lien. A mechanics lien arises when someone furnishes labor or materials to improve a piece of property. A worker or supplier who is not paid may file a notice of lien with the county recorder and the property owner and collect the amount owed from a subsequent sale of the property. Assessment An assessment is a value placed on real property by a local taxing authority for the purpose of levying taxes. Real estate taxes are calculated by multiplying the assessed value of a piece of property by the tax rate. Most properties are reassessed periodically, and a property's assessed value may not be the same as its actual market value. A special assessment is a tax levied on a piece of property to pay for improvements that benefit the particular property, such as streets, sidewalks, and street lighting. Special assessments are liens on the property until they are paid. Real Estate Ownership Typically, ownership of real estate includes the following rights: To sell To use the property as security for loans (encumber) To improve the land or buildings on the land To use and possess the property Property can be owned by one or more persons. The two common ways in which parties co-own a piece of property are joint tenancy and tenancy in common. Joint Tenancy Although joint tenancy is a popular way for a husband and wife to own property, there is no requirement that joint tenants be married or that there only be two joint tenants. Owners in joint tenancy have a right to sell, encumber, and possess the entire property. When one joint tenant dies, the remaining joint tenants automatically take the deceased joint tenant's share of the property by right of survivorship. The surviving joint tenants are required to file a death certificate and an affidavit with the county recorder. Joint tenancy allows the surviving joint tenants to avoid probate, transfer and death taxes. Tenants in Common Tenants in common, like joint tenants, share the right to possess, sell, and encumber the property. Unlike joint tenants, however, tenants in common do not have a right of survivorship. Upon the death of one tenant in common, his or her ownership interest passes to his or her heirs as part of the estate. Advantages and Disadvantages of Co-Ownership Although there are advantages to co-owning property, there are drawbacks as well. If co-owners cannot agree on use, sale, or possession of a piece of property, they may have to go to court to resolve the matter in a partition action. In a partition action a joint tenant or tenant in common asks the court to split the property in a fair and just manner. Real property may be difficult to divide and partial interests may be difficult to sell, so a court will usually order that the property be sold and proceeds from the sale distributed to the co-owners in relation to their interests. Residential Real Estate The most common consumer real estate transaction involves the sale of a home. Unlike years past, today a home buyer has a variety of options in deciding the type of dwelling to buy. Single family houses are still the most common selections for home buyers. Single family homes provide the maximum amount of privacy and freedom to their owners, but they may also be the most expensive option and require the most upkeep. Condominiums and townhouses may be an option for some purchasers. Both give their owners many of the advantages of home ownership, such as tax deductibility of mortgage interest, without some of the responsibilities some people consider to be disadvantages, such as lawn care and exterior upkeep. Residents usually pay association fees to cover maintenance. A homestead is not a particular type of dwelling; instead, it is a tax classification that can dramatically lower what a homeowner pays in real estate taxes. People who live in the property they own are taxed at a much lower rate than if they rent out that property to others. If a person buys property that currently is rental property, he or she must fill out an application to change the property's tax status; otherwise, the person could end up paying non-homestead taxes for the first year of ownership. Title Title to real estate is the ownership of the property. Title may refer to the actual ownership or to the documentary evidence of that ownership. Title is what gives the owner the right to the property. In order to sell a piece of property, all title matters must be cleared. Usually, this is accomplished through a title search. A title search is a diligent search of all records relating to the property to determine whether the owner is authorized to sell the property and whether there are any claims against it. If any defects in title are discovered during the title search, the seller usually has time to cure the defect. Often people have title insurance to protect them against any hidden defects in the title. There are two types of title insurance. One type protects the lender's interest in the property and the other protects the home owner's interest. Deeds A deed is a written instrument that transfers the title of property from one person to another. There are many different types of deeds. Generally, in Illinois, title is transferred by a general warranty deed. A general warranty deed provides the greatest protection to the purchaser because the seller pledges or warrants that he or she legally owns the property and that there are no outstanding liens, mortgages, or other encumbrances against it. A warranty deed is also a guarantee of title, which means that the seller may be held liable for damages if the buyer discovers that the title is defective. A warranty deed is no substitute for title insurance, however, because a warranty from a seller who later dies or goes bankrupt may have little value. Another type of deed used is a quitclaim deed. A quitclaim deed relinquishes whatever interest, if any, the seller may have in the property to the buyer. A quitclaim deed gives the buyer the least protection of any deed. If the seller is the sole owner of the property, the quitclaim deed is enough to transfer title, but the buyer takes a risk by accepting a quitclaim deed because it offers the buyer no guarantee that the title is valid. Quitclaim deeds customarily are used during the property settlement phase of a marriage dissolution. Recording In Illinois, real estate owners and parties with real estate interests are required to file with the county all documents affecting their interest in property in order to give public notice of the interest. Since 1992, Illinois titles are transferred under the abstract system. Abstract records go back hundreds of years and an abstract of title is a record of all the entries for that property. Buying or Selling a Home Because Illinois has many programs to help people buy a home, home ownership is a possibility for people at all income levels. Buying a home may be both rewarding and stressful. Every home purchase involves a number of complex legal issues, unfamiliar terminology, and lots of paperwork. Knowing how the process works may reduce much of the headache. Real Estate Agents One of the first decisions for someone interested in buying or selling a home is whether to use the services of a real estate agent. Real estate agents are hired to help buyers and sellers meet to complete the sale of a house. Home buyers and sellers may choose to work with an agent exclusively or non-exclusively. A person who decides to work with an agent will sign several contracts to clarify the relationship between the consumer and the agent. These contracts may include provisions regarding dual agency. This term refers to the arrangement in which an agent represents both the buyer and the seller of the house. It may be difficult for one agent to represent both a buyer and a seller fairly. When the agent finds a buyer for a house that the agency has listed, the agent's dual loyalties become apparent. The seller wants the highest price possible while the buyer wants to pay the lowest price. The contracts state what the agent may share with the other party and which information must remain confidential. Seller Disclosures In Illinois, the Residential Real Property Disclosure Act requires that when a seller signs the standard purchase agreement, he or she must attach a disclosure document. This document must disclose to the buyer any material defects, which are known hazards or problems with the structure or the heating, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical system. Just because problems are listed on this statement does not mean that the seller must repair the problems, but the buyer may request either repair or a price break because of the problem. In some communities, the seller also is required to complete an inspection report. In that case, an inspector checks the house for defects and these defects are listed in the report. Home Warranties Whenever a builder sells a home in Illinois, the home comes with an implied warranty of habitability. This means that the builder guarantees that there are no major problems with the home, even problems that may not be apparent right away. The buyer has a reasonable amount of time to discover any major problems covered under the warranty. For example, if it rains every day for a month and the roof does not leak, everyone may assume the roof is sound. If the roof begins leaking during a rainy period a year later, it is probably too late to claim the house was sold with a defective roof. The buyer had a reasonable amount of time to discover the defect. The leaky roof would not be covered under the implied warranty of habitability. Illinois law also provides that any residential unit sold by installment contract is voidable unless there is attached to the contract information about dwelling code compliance. The seller may attach either a certificate of compliance, or may include an express written warranty that the home has not been the subject of any dwelling code violations in the past ten years. If there have been violations, the seller must attach a copy of every notice of violation. Home buyers should be aware of state laws dealing with removal of lead-based paint from a home. The Lead Poisoning Prevention Act requires owners to remove, replace, or secure and permanently cover walls covered in lead-based paint. Owners must take care of lead problems after receiving notice from the Department of Public Health. Failure to comply with the Act may subject the owner to criminal misdemeanor charges. Foreclosure Nobody in the process of buying a house wants to think about the possibility of falling behind in house payments to the extent that the bank or mortgage company will foreclose on the loan and claim possession of the house. Nevertheless, it is wise for a consumer to understand why a lender forecloses on a piece of property, so the consumer can minimize the possibility of losing a house Up to a point, a lender will typically work with a homeowner who falls behind in making payments because the lender does not want to go through the hassle and expense of foreclosing on a property. Homeowners should communicate with their lenders if there are financial difficulties present that make paying the mortgage difficult. It can take months for a lender to begin a foreclosure, and more months before it is completed, so usually there is time to get the money needed to assure a lender that there will not be a default. After a lender begins the foreclosure process, there is a period of time called a redemption period during which a homeowner can stop the foreclosure by making all delinquent mortgage payments plus the lender's court costs and attorney fees. In Illinois, a lender may accept the deed to the property instead of foreclosing. The property owner loses the property, but if he or she truly has no other way to avoid foreclosure, offering the deed as a way to satisfy the debt can prevent his or her credit rating from being severely damaged by a foreclosure. However, because lenders generally want cash and not real estate, there is no guarantee that a lender will accept a deed offered in lieu of foreclosure. A notice of foreclosure must state the name of the person whose property is subject to foreclosure, the court, the case number, the name of the person who holds the title to the property, a legal description of the property, and the mortgage identification information. It must be signed by the foreclosing party or the party's attorney. Landlord -- Tenant Under Illinois law, whenever the owner (landlord) of a house, apartment, room, or any other living space agrees to let someone else (tenant) use the space for a fee, the two parties enter into a legally binding rental contract. General contract principles are discussed in the Contract Law Chapter. Rental contracts are a special class of contracts that are governed by many unique rules. This section discusses the laws applicable to rental contracts. Leases The terms of any rental agreement are stated in the lease. A lease can be an oral agreement or a written document. There are two general types of leases: the periodic lease and the lea