Small Business Law Leading Illinois Small Business Law Attorneys Small Business Law Small Business Law Sole Proprietorship Partnership General Partnership Limited Partnership Limited Liability Partnership Corporation Subchapter S Corporation Nonprofit Corporation Franchise General Business Issues Name Registration Tax Identification Numbers Licenses Resources Small Business Law There are several ways to organize a business, and the option selected depends on various factors. The option chosen by a small family-owned and operated venture may not be the same choice of a company with several owners and many employees. Each option has benefits and drawbacks. The option selected by a business may change over time as the business' needs, identity, size, budget, and liabilities change. A person may start out as a sole proprietor but decide years later to incorporate. Before a person or persons decide what option would best meet their needs, an attorney experienced in business matters should be consulted. The Law & Leading Attorneys: Illinois Business Guide contains information on issues of concern to businesspersons as well as listings of leading Illinois business attorneys. The following is a brief summary of the common forms of business organizations. At the end of the chapter, issues that may affect all forms of business will be outlined, including registering an assumed name and obtaining tax identification numbers and licenses. Sole Proprietorship A sole proprietorship is the simplest form of business organization. One person owns, manages, and controls the business. A sole proprietorship may have employees, but only the owner is in charge of the business. The owner receives the business profits and losses. This person is also responsible for any debts the business may incur. Income, expenses, and losses are reported on the business owner's individual tax return. A sole proprietorship is relatively easy to organize. The business owner must acquire the appropriate licenses, if any, and tax identification numbers, and must register the business name. There are no specific state filing requirements for this business option. The benefits of the sole proprietorship include having complete control over the business, ease of the initial set-up, and having business profits taxed at the individual taxpayer rate, which is lower than the rate charged to corporations. The drawbacks to sole proprietorship include being personally responsible for debts and liabilities of the business. For example, if a business owner has debts that are not being paid, the creditors can reach the personal assets of the business owner, such as a personal checking account. A business owner may obtain insurance to minimize this drawback. Other drawbacks include lack of continuity--when the business owner dies, the business ceases to exist--and the fact that a sole proprietor is not able to deduct benefits like health, dental, and life insurance on his or her income tax return as business expenses. Partnership A partnership is a business owned by two or more parties. In Illinois it is possible to form three types of partnerships: general, limited, and limited liability. General Partnership A general partnership occurs when two or more persons own, manage, and control a business. Persons in a general partnership share the rights, duties, and responsibilities. Partnerships may also have employees; however, only the partners have control of the business activities. A partnership has more issues to address than the sole proprietorship. Besides obtaining the appropriate licenses and tax numbers and registering the business name, partners must agree on the treatment of business profits, expenses, losses, and other business concerns. Typically, there is a written agreement between the partners to address these issues. A general partnership in Illinois need not be registered with the state, and there are no formal requirements for its formation. However, state law governs the conduct, liabilities, and dissolution of a partnership, as well as the relationship between and liabilities of the partners. The benefits of a general partnership include the owners' control of the business. However, unlike the sole proprietor who has exclusive control, partners share control and responsibilities. Partners have the advantage of more than one resource for finances, ideas, and sharing the work load. The formation of a general partnership can be less complicated than other business formats, such as limited partnerships and corporations. Finally, profits from the partnership are included on the partners' individual tax returns and taxed at the individual taxpayer rate, which is lower than the rate charged to corporations. The drawbacks to a general partnership include the partners' personal responsibility for the debts and liabilities of the partnership. A partner can be liable for debts incurred by other partners in furtherance of the business. As in a sole proprietorship, a partnership may obtain insurance to minimize this drawback. Business partners are treated like sole proprietors with regard to deducting benefits provided to themselves. Benefits like health, dental, and life insurance may generally not be deducted on partners' income tax returns as business expenses. In a general partnership, the business generally dissolves upon the death, retirement or withdrawal of a partner, unless there is an express agreement to continue the business under such circumstances. If the business is continued, the former partner, or the former partner's legal representative, is entitled to the value of the former partner's interest, or the profits attributable to the use of the former partner's right in the property. By law, if a partnership interest is assigned to another person, that person is only entitled to the partner's profits from the business. That person may not participate in the management or operation of the partnership unless all the partners agree. These legal requirements may be modified by a partnership agreement. A partnership agreement may detail how a partnership interest may be sold, transferred, or handled upon the death of a partner. Addressing potential issues in an agreement may be one way to prevent disputes from occurring. Limited Partnership A limited partnership is similar in many respects to a general partnership. However, in a limited partnership, there are two types of partners--general and limited. Illinois law requires that a limited partnership have one or more general partners and one or more limited partners. The principal difference between a general and limited partner is that the limited partner can limit his or her personal liability for partnership debts to the amount he or she invests in the partnership. The limited partner, in exchange for the reduction in liability, does not control or manage the business. The general partner controls and manages the business and is personally liable for partnership debts. Because limited partnerships must meet specific Illinois statutory requirements, they can be more complicated to establish. A limited partnership must apply for a certificate of limited partnership from the Secretary of State, and this certification must be renewed every two years. A limited partnership must maintain certain records, and must follow specific requirements for registering the business name. A limited partnership is not permitted to engage in the businesses of insurance, banking, or operating a railroad. The benefits of a limited partnership depend on whether one is a general or limited partner. The general partner enjoys control and management responsibilities. The limited partner receives limited personal liability. Profits for both types of partners are included on the partners' individual tax returns and taxed at the individual taxpayer rate, which is lower than the rate charged to corporations. The drawbacks of a limited partnership also depend on whether one is a general or limited partner. A general partner is personally responsible for the business debts while the limited partner is only liable for debts up to the amount he or she has inve