Workers' Compensation Law Leading Illinois Workers' Compensation Law Attorneys Workers' Compensation Law Workers' Compensation Law Workers' Compensation: The Basics Who Is Covered Employers Employees at Work Nature of Injury Available Benefits The Employer's Responsibilities Reporting an Injury and Collecting Benefits Payment of Benefits When an Employer or Carrier Refuses Benefits Resources Workers' Compensation Law Each year thousands of Illinois employees suffer work-related injuries. Like many other states, Illinois has a workers' compensation system to compensate employees for accidental injuries occurring in the workplace. All employers subject to the Illinois Workers' Compensation Act must either carry workers' compensation insurance or demonstrate that they are self-insured and have the financial resources to cover any reasonably anticipated claims. Employees may obtain information about coverage from their employers or from the Illinois Industrial Commission. Workers' compensation law is complicated and its regulations and procedures frequently change. A worker with questions concerning workers' compensation should consult an attorney, particularly after suffering an injury. This chapter provides an outline of Illinois' workers' compensation program. Other employment issues, including discrimination against persons with disabilities, are discussed in the Employment Law Chapter. Workers' Compensation: The Basics Workers' compensation is a state program that requires employers to have insurance policies covering employees for work-related injuries. When an employee is accidentally injured on the job, the employer or the insurance company pays for medical care and lost wages due to the injury, regardless of fault. No part of the premium or benefits can be charged to employees. The notion of employers paying for employee work-related injuries originated in Germany during the latter half of the 19th century. Among the chief proponents of a German workers' compensation program was Bertha von Krupp of the famed German manufacturer, Krupp Works. Krupp had long believed that taking care of workers was in the best interest of business and in 1884, successfully persuaded Chancellor Otto von Bismark to support workers' compensation for all of Germany. Workers' compensation came to the United States in about 1910, when New York and Massachusetts adopted programs. Illinois adopted its workers' compensation program in 1911. This program is administered by the Illinois Industrial Commission. The advent of workers' compensation relieved injured employees from having to sue their employers to collect any sort of damages. Before workers' compensation, an employee had to prove that the employer had negligently failed to provide a safe work environment. This was often difficult and resulted in many injured workers going without compensation. Under workers' compensation, however, employees usually collect benefits regardless of fault. That is, even if an employee is responsible for his or her own accidental injury, the employee is covered by workers' compensation under most circumstances, as long as the injury occurred on the job. The main restriction to the program is that in most cases, workers' compensation benefits are the only form of remedy for workplace injuries. After receiving benefits, an injured employee may not sue his or her employer for further compensation. Who Is Covered Employers Illinois has a two-tiered system for providing workers' compensation coverage. Certain employers are required to have coverage under the Workers' Compensation Act. This group includes all government and school agencies, as well as those who employ domestic workers in their homes at least 40 hours per week for 13 or more weeks per year. It also includes businesses that are declared to be extrahazardous. Under the law, the following businesses are extrahazardous: Most manufacturing, construction and development companies Food and beverage providers Beauty shops Mining industries Certain small businesses may elect not to be covered, even if they fall generally into one of the statutory categories. Employers who are not automatically required to carry coverage under the Workers' Compensation Act may elect to do so voluntarily, or they may elect to be self-insured. In 1988, Illinois passed legislation that encourages businesses to apply for self-insurer status. Selection of one option does not, however, preclude an employer from changing to the other status at a later date. Regardless of the option selected, every employer must post notices in the workplace that provide employees with the name, business address, and telephone number of the person, service company, or insurance company to contact for information regarding the coverage. Employees at Work Only employees are eligible for workers' compensation benefits. Broadly defined, an employee is anyone under oral or written appointment or contract for hire, working on a full- or part-time basis. This definition encompasses even aliens who are unlawfully employed, minors, and prisoners on work-release programs. Not included in this definition, however, are domestic workers in private homes (except those indicated above), volunteers in non-governmental entities, professional athletes, casual laborers, real estate brokers and sales representatives who work exclusively on commission, and independent contractors or anyone who is not subject to the control and direction of the employer. An employee's injury must arise "out of and in the course of employment" to be covered by workers' compensation. Basically, this means that the injury has to occur while the employee is involved in some activity directly related to his or her job. For example, an employee injured at the job site while performing tasks at the direction of the employer is covered. An employee who is injured on a business trip is covered as long as the employee is engaged in employment duties. Workers' compensation coverage even extends to an emergency situation in which an employee leaves work intending to save life or property. Under Illinois law, however, an employee is not covered during volunteer work-related or work-sponsored recreational events (such as sporting events, picnics, or parties) unless the employee was assigned or ordered by his or her supervisor to participate. An employee is not covered while traveling to or from the place of employment, unless the employer asks the employee to perform a special duty on the way. Employees injured during work breaks when no work is being performed also may not be covered, depending on the circumstances. Nature of Injury Workers' compensation benefits primarily cover accidental injuries. Accidental injuries are those that happen unexpectedly, without design or plan. This includes many repetitive stress injuries such as carpal-tunnel syndrome, as well as heart attacks, strokes, or other physical problems caused by work. In addition to accidental injuries, an employee also may recover if a pre-existing physical condition is made worse by his or her work. Workers' compensation does not cover injuries caused by intentional acts of assault or aggression by an employer or a fellow employee. For those types of injuries, an employee would seek compensation in the civil courts. Available Benefits Workers' compensation entitles an employee to all reasonable and necessary medical care related to the injury, to payments for lost wages, and to rehabilitation and training. Under the Illinois Workers' Compensation Act an injured employee may be eligible for some or all of the following benefits: Medical services, including all reasonable expenses for necessary care and treatment, which may include first aid, visits to an approved health care provider, surgery, hospital care, dental or orthodontic treatment, prescription drugs, and medical supplies ordered by an approved physician Temporary total disability payments that provide the employee with up to two-thirds of his or her weekly wage for the time the worker is unable to work. (No compensation is payable, however, for loss of wages during the first three working d