Health Law Leading Illinois Health Law Attorneys Health Law Health Law Access to the Health Care System Paying for Health Care Medicaid Medicare Medicare Parts A and B Costs Not Covered by Medicare Insurance Issues Access to Facilities Health Care Providers' Responsibilities Consent to Care Right to Refuse Treatment Written Information HIV Testing Confidentiality Anatomical Gifts Reporting Abuse Employee Health Care Resources Health Law Health law is a relatively new area of legal specialization. Many lawyers are attracted to this evolving area of practice. Their clients range from health care consumers seeking assistance to pay for health care to large corporate health care providers seeking to buy nursing homes. Because of the diversity of clients, the health law practice area has numerous subspecialties. This chapter covers subjects of most interest to businesses and health care providers. Employee benefits plans are discussed in the Employee Benefits Law Chapter. Medical malpractice is discussed in the Professional Malpractice Defense Law Chapter. Access to the Health Care System The state of Illinois has many fine health care providers and facilities, yet Illinois residents may face a number of access hurdles before receiving treatment. Patients, their families, and health care institutions all need to be aware of the legal framework that exists to guarantee access to health care. Paying for Health Care For some, the most important health care issue is paying for health care. Several government-sponsored health care programs, administered primarily by the Illinois Department of Public Aid, provide payments to health care providers. In most cases, medical professionals have a right to payment within 30 days. Medicaid Medicaid should not be confused with Medicare. Despite their similar names, the two programs are different. Medicare, described below, is a program funded and administered entirely by the federal government to provide health care to elderly persons and people with disabilities. Medicare coverage is uniform throughout the country. Medicaid is a cooperative program funded partly by the federal government and partly by the individual states, and administered primarily by the states that provide health care to indigent persons. Each state has wide latitude to decide how Medicaid operates within the state. In Illinois, Medicaid is administered by the Illinois Department of Public Aid. The federal government's role in Medicaid is quite limited. It pays a percentage of the cost of each state's health care program for indigent people and ensures that every state's program complies with various federal requirements. The amount of money a state receives from the federal government is called the Federal Financial Participation (FFP). Each state's FFP is determined by a formula based on the state's per capita income and the amount of medical services the state chooses to provide to needy people within the state. To receive Medicaid, a person must have assets with a low value and very low income as determined by a complex formula. In Illinois, a person generally can have no more than $3,000 in assets and $591 income per month, although there is a complex formula applied which considers the applicant's unique situation. There are several assets the formula does not count, including: Homestead Automobile necessary for employment or otherwise to produce income, to receive health care, or essential for transporting a person with disabilities Income-producing property Household goods and personal effects Certain other assets are not counted, such as jointly held real estate if the other joint owner refuses to sell, and property that is tied up in probate. As long as transfers are compensated, it is legal to restructure one's assets and income with the intent of qualifying for Medicaid. A person whose income is above Medicaid limits might be able to qualify for Medicaid under a spend-down provision. The spend-down is equal to the amount a person's income is over Medicaid limits. Medicaid occasionally agrees to cover the amount that a person's medical bills exceed a patient's spend-down. Many senior citizens find restructuring assets to qualify for Medicaid to be an especially attractive option, because Medicaid coverage pays for a wider variety of nursing care services and for a longer period of time than Medicare. Medicare Medicare--also called Medical Assistance in Illinois--is a federal program administered by the Social Security Administration designed to cover some basic medical and health care costs of eligible individuals over age 65, as well as many people with disabilities. Medicare has become an enormous federal program, providing billions of dollars in coverage every year. Medicare Parts A and B Medicare has two basic divisions, called Part A and Part B. Medicare Part A, commonly known as Hospital Insurance, covers medically necessary hospital and related health care. Included in Part A are costs for such expenses as inpatient hospital care necessitated by acute illness, skilled nursing home care, certified hospice care for the terminally ill, inpatient psychiatric care, and care in the home by a certified home health care provider. Medicare Part B, commonly known as Medical Insurance, is a voluntary health insurance program designed to cover some of the costs not covered by Medicare Part A, such as outpatient hospital services, outpatient physical therapy, speech pathology services, necessary ambulance service, and medical equipment. Unlike Part A, which is paid for out of Social Security taxes and is free to anyone who qualifies, Part B is an optional program that carries a small monthly premium. People qualify for Hospital Insurance when they turn 65 years old or if they are covered by Social Security or Railroad Retirement benefits. The person need not actually be receiving financial benefits through either of these two programs in order to receive Medicare benefits. Anyone age 65 or older not eligible for Social Security or Railroad Retirement benefits still may receive Medicare Part A coverage by paying a monthly premium. Medicare Part B coverage is available automatically to anyone who qualifies for Medicare Part A benefits. In fact, all applicants for Medicare Part A benefits are enrolled automatically in Medicare Part B unless they opt out of Part B coverage. The federal government contracts with private insurance companies to handle routine claims processing, payment, and other functions under Parts A and B. Costs Not Covered by Medicare Medicare never was intended to provide comprehensive coverage for all medical needs of America's elderly population, but rather was intended to supplement private resources. Many health services are not covered by Medicare. For example, Medicare does not pay for: Custodial care intended to help the patient with his or her daily living needs such as help with bathing, walking, or exercising by someone without medical training Dentures or routine dental care Eyeglasses, hearing aids, and examinations to prescribe or fit them Nursing home care (except skilled nursing care) Prescription drugs Routine physical checkups and related tests Insurance Issues Many people look for some form of private insurance to supplement Medicare and other government-sponsored health coverage. Some people are insured through their jobs, and even when they retire may be able to get continuation or conversion coverage from these group policies. Others join Health Maintenance Organizations. Another popular option in Illinois is coverage under the Illinois Comprehensive Health Insurance Plan. This program was intended as an alternative to traditional health insurance. It benefits Illinois residents who are refused health insurance by private health insurance companies, or who can obtain insurance but only at an excessive rate. The Comprehensive Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for medically necessary treatment such as hospital services. In Illinois, two additional programs help older people and people with disabilities pay for their Medicare coverage. In order to be eligible for these programs, an individual must have assets of no more than $4,000 and must live in Illinois. The Qualified Medicare Beneficiary Program (QMB) assists those who have Part A Hospital Insurance and whose income is at 100 percent or less than the federal poverty level. The Specified Low-Income Medicare Beneficiary Program (SLMB) covers Part B Medical Insurance for individuals with incomes between 100 percent and 110 percent of the poverty level. These programs are run by the Illinois Department of Public Aid. Access to Facilities Hospitals rarely refuse to treat a patient if the patient has health care insurance, but sometimes hospitals do refuse to admit patients. Federal and state laws governing the medical industry clearly forbid health care providers from discriminating in deciding whom to treat. The Internal Revenue Service requires hospitals to admit all paying members of their communities in order to enjoy tax exempt status. The Hill-Burton Act, which provides construction grants for many hospital projects, requires hospitals receiving grants under its programs to admit all paying patients. Medicare and Medicaid require all participating hospitals to provide care to all covered patients. Fortunately, most of these laws guaranteeing access to health care facilities are invoked infrequently. Most hospitals are eager to admit patients. Sometimes, however, because of prejudices or a hospital's concern about being reimbursed, Medicare or Medicaid recipients have more difficulty accessing hospitals. The AIDS epidemic has made accessibility an issue in some recent cases in which hospital decision makers were concerned with the potentially enormous costs of fighting the disease, worried about spreading the disease, or objected to the lifestyles they assumed AIDS sufferers led. Hospitals and other providers of health care should be aware of the laws in this area, and should know that refusing a person health care based on personal bias is illegal. Health Care Providers' Responsibilities Once a patient and a health care provider have formed a relationship inside the health care system, the law guarantees the patient certain rights and requires certain duties of the health care provider. In addition to a general right to good medical care, which includes being informed of who is treating the patient, the recipient of health care has a right under the Illinois Medical Patient Rights Act to exercise informed consent, to refuse treatment, to obtain certain information in writing, and to have medical records treated confidentially. Other laws require health care providers to be involved in reporting and preventing abuse. Illinois law penalizes health care providers who violate patients' rights. Consent to Care In general, a doctor may not diagnose or treat a patient without obtaining that person's informed consent first. Informed consent means the person has given consent after receiving all relevant information about the treatment, including the risks. Failure to get informed consent for treatment can subject the doctor to charges of battery, invasion of privacy, or malpractice. Under some circumstances, the patient's consent is not required. If the person cannot consent for himself or herself, a guardian or close relative may give permission for medical treatment. In an emergency, the head of a health care facility will consent to treatment if a patient's close relatives cannot be reached. A patient's consent to treatment will be implied if the patient is unable to give consent and an emergency exists or if the patient can give consent but the doctor does not have sufficient time to properly inform the patient of all risks and alternatives. A doctor need not obtain a client's consent to treat mental illness, mental retardation, or chemical dependency. Minors generally need the approval of a parent or guardian to undergo a medical or surgical procedure. Exceptions to this rule are emergencies, certain reproductive matters, and testing and treatment for certain sexually-transmitted diseases. Most doctors know they should not treat a patient without any permission, so disputes in this area rarely center on whether a doctor had permission. More often, disputes turn on whether the doctor disclosed sufficient information for the patient's consent to be informed or whether the doctor went beyond the consented actions. To give informed consent in Illinois, a patient must be given information about the foreseeable results and risks of a particular procedure and the reasonable alternatives. The physician does not have to disclose every possible risk. It is up to the doctor to decide what to tell the patient, based on the patient's best interests. All of these must be communicated in language the patient is likely to understand. Experimental procedures or research may not be performed on a patient without the patient's consent prior to the procedure or research. A patient's consent or refusal to participate in experimental procedures or research must be recorded in the patient's permanent record. Right to Refuse Treatment Illinois law also gives patients the right to refuse treatment or medication. Patients who refuse recommended treatments must be informed of the likely medical and psychological results of such refusal, and documentation must be placed in their records. The right of parents to refuse medical treatment for their children is more limited. Written Information Illinois law provides that patients have the right certain information in writing. Every patient has a right to a written bill for services. If the bill is not understandable, the patient has a right to an explanation. Any patient admitted to a hospital must receive a copy of the Medical Patient Rights Act, or a written statement summarizing the rights described in the law. If the patient is a minor, or cannot read the statement, the hospital must give the written information to the patient's parent, guardian, or representative. HIV Testing Clinics and hospitals in Illinois test patients for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Because of the discrimination many HIV-positive people face, there is concern for confidentiality and anonymity of the test. While all health care providers are required to respect a patient's confidentiality, some clinics are committed to anonymous testing. At these sites, fictitious names or code numbers are used to hide the patient's identity. Anyone interested in providing HIV testing should understand the important distinction between anonymous testing and confidential testing. A test can be confidential yet still be recorded on a patient's permanent record. Anyone with access to that record, including doctors, insurance companies, and health departments can learn that the person was tested. If the testing is anonymous, no one at the testing site knows the person's true identity so the test never becomes part of the person's permanent medical record. Confidentiality Illinois law provides that health care providers must keep confidential patients' medical records and any information patients provide them. For example, Illinois Rules of Evidence prohibit the introduction in court of confidential communications between a patient and a health care provider. The public policy behind this rule is the promotion of complete communication between doctors and their patients. Under other Illinois laws, a health care provider must have the patient's consent to release records to a third person. This general law does not prevent a doctor from releasing records to another doctor in an emergency for the purpose of treating the patient. It also does not prevent the release of records to the Illinois Department of Public Health. Both of these protections will be set aside if they conflict with other public policies. For example, a doctor who is told by a patient that the patient plans to kill a particular person has a legal obligation to warn that person. Also, doctors have an obligation to report to the police anyone who comes for treatment of a suspicious wound, such as a stab or gunshot wound. Confidentiality also may be relinquished by people who are HIV-positive. The State of Illinois requires tha